Intro to R and tidyverse exercises (#90)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: intro-to-R-tidyverse/03-intro_to_r_tidyverse_exercise.Rmd

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ---
title: "Exercise: Clean Metadata and Prepare Gene Expression Matrix for Downstream Analysis"
output:   
  html_notebook: 
    toc: true
    toc_float: true
---
The goal of these exercises is to help you get familiar with using tidyverse functions to manipulate data. 

Here, 

> TODO: Determine suitable experiment and write about it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we will use a [medulloblastoma dataset](https://www.refine.bio/experiments/GSE49243/gene-expression-data-from-medulloblastoma-tumor-samples) that has been processed on the [refine.bio](http://docs.refine.bio/en/latest/main_text.html#processing-information). 
In short, this study collected medulloblastoma microarray profiles from patients of a variety of ages and includes information about their demographics and histology of the medulloblastoma samples [(Kool et al. _Cancer Cell_ . 2014.)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24651015).
```

### Setup 
Before we start the exercises, we need to create the necessary directories and loading the necessary libraries.

#### Creating necessary directories
We need to create a directory to store the results of the exercises. We have done this for you. 
Run the code chunk below and take a look at your files pane. You should see a directory `exercise-results` created. 

```{r}

> #creating required directories as needed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
results_dir <- "exercise-results"
```

> #creating required directories as needed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# creating required directories as needed
```
Also see my comment about comments. lol. Meta-commenting.

> if (!dir.exists("excercise-results")) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#creating results directory if it doesn't exist
if (!dir.exists(results_dir)) {
```

>   # ... create a 'results' directory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>   dir.create("exercise-results")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  dir.create(results_dir)
```

}
```

#### Loading libraries

> For these exercises we will need the `tidyverse` library. Go ahead and load the library in the code chunk below. Don't forget to run the code chunk once you write the command! 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For these exercises, we will need the `tidyverse` library. Go ahead and load the library in the code chunk below.
Don't forget to run the code chunk once you write the command! 
```

Reviewer: Also, our generally formatting tendencies/rules/guidelines has been starting each sentence on a new line. I *think* we intend to keep following those rules in the exercise notebooks, but we particularly wanna follow that guideline for lines that end up being larger than 80 characters.

Author: Is there a reason for the 80 characters per line guideline? Just curious.

Reviewer: That's what the style guides that we follow say https://google.github.io/styleguide/Rguide.xml#linelength

```{r}

> #load tidyverse library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# load tidyverse library
```
See comment about comment capitalization. Doesn't matter what you choose, probably just stick with one format.

```

> #### Importing Files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Importing files
```
What ever you decide to do for title capitalization, also probably stick with the same throughout.

Let's import all the files we will need for this exercise. 
The metadata is present in `exercise-data/metadata_GSE49243.tsv` and gene expression matrix is in `exercise-data/GSE49243.tsv`
Go ahead and read the metadata and gene expression matrix into variables called `metadata` and `gene_expression`

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remember to use `file.path`. 

```

```{r}

> # Reading Metadata

Reviewer: Here you've started capitalizing your comments, I don't care if you capitalize them or choose not too, but probably stick with the same for all?

metadata <- 

> # Reading Gene Expression Matrix

Reviewer: Same comment as above.

gene_expression <- 
```

### Cleaning metadata

> First, we are going to perform some cleaning activities like filtering, renaming, reordering, etc and then write the cleaned metadata into a new file. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we are going to clean the metadata using filtering, renaming, reordering and we will write our newly cleaned metadata into a new file. 
```

> 

Reviewer: This looks like an extra space.

#### Inspect the metadata
Now that you have read the metadata into the variable `metadata`, explore what the metadata looks like. 

```{r}
# Explore the metadata

```

> 

Reviewer: This also looks like an extra space.

#### Filtering and trimming
Next, we're going to do some manipulations on the metadata to retain only the information we are interested in. 

> Below we have done some manipulations on the metadata. Take a look and then perform the same manipulations using pipes `%>%` and store the result in `metadata_clean`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below we have done some manipulations on the metadata. 
Take a look the steps we performed and then perform the same manipulations but by using pipes `%>%` and storing the result in `metadata_clean`. 
```

```{r}
# Manipulations w/o pipes
metadata_nopipe <- metadata
metadata_nopipe <- filter(metadata_nopipe, refinebio_age < 18)

> metadata_nopipe <- select(metadata_nopipe, refinebio_accession_code, refinebio_age,refinebio_sex,histology)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
metadata_nopipe <- select(metadata_nopipe, refinebio_accession_code, refinebio_age, refinebio_sex, histology)
```

metadata_nopipe <- arrange(metadata_nopipe, refinebio_age)
```

It's your turn! 

```{r}
# Now you try it, with pipes %>%
metadata_clean <- 
  
```

Run the code chunk below to check if you got the same results. 

```{r}
all.equal(metadata_nopipe, metadata_clean)
```

#### Rename columns

> The column names `refinebio_accession_code`, `refinebio_age`, `refinebio_sex` are too unwieldy. Let's rename it to something more manageable like `sample_id`, `age`, and `sex` respectively. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The column names `refinebio_accession_code`, `refinebio_age`, `refinebio_sex` are too unwieldy. 
Let's rename them to something more manageable like `sample_id`, `age`, and `sex` respectively. 
```

> To do this, tidyverse has a function `dplyr::rename`. Use the help section to understand how you can use this function. Store the renamed metadata back into the variable `metadata_clean`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do this, tidyverse has a function `dplyr::rename`. 
Use the help window to understand how you can use this function. 
Store the renamed metadata back into the variable `metadata_clean`. 
```

> (Feel free to Google for solutions as well!)

Reviewer: Did we determine whether this should be capitalized if being used as a verb instead of a proper noun? I would guess not capitalizing, but unsure.

Author: Gonna go with not capitalizing it.

```{r}

> # Use the Help section to learn how you can use the rename function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Use the help window to learn how you can use the rename function
```
Before we didn't capitalize 'help'. So whatever we pick, we should try to be consistent.

metadata_clean <- 

```

> Use head() function check if the column names changed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `head` function check if the column names changed.
```
Usually our generally mode is to put functions, package names and the like inside backtics. That was they stick out as code things.

```{r}

```

> 

Reviewer: Looks like an extra line.

### Summarize metadata
Now, let's calculate the mean age by sex, mean age by histology, and counts of each tissue by sex. 

> 

Reviewer: Probably could get rid of the extra line here.

> If you get stuck at any point, feel free to refer to the Help section or google for solutions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you get stuck at any point, feel free to refer to the help window or Google for solutions.
```
Just whatever we choose we should stick to.

```{r}
# Calculate mean age by sex

```

> 

Reviewer: These are also potentially extra lines I think.

```{r}
# Calculate mean age by histology

> 

Reviewer: Most blank chunks you've been starting people with one line, but here and the next chunk you've put two. Is there a particular reason for this?

```

> 

Reviewer: Extra line.

```{r}

> # Calculate how many of each tissue type exists for each sex.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Calculate how many of each tissue type exists for each sex
```

> 

Reviewer: See comment above.

```

> 

Reviewer: Extra line.

> ### Select the samples in the Gene Experssion Matrix

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Select the samples in the gene expression matrix
```
I think most places you've not capitalized each word in the sentence, so I've changed this to be the same. Also changed `Experssion`.

> Now, select the samples in the gene expression matrix so that it has the same samples as `metadata_clean`. (Remember we read the gene expression matrix into `gene_expression`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, select the samples in the gene expression matrix so that it has the same samples as `metadata_clean`. 
(Remember we read the gene expression matrix into `gene_expression`)
```

```{r}
# Select the gene expression matrix by samples in the cleaned metadata
cleaned_gene_expression <- 
```

### Write to files

#### Write to cleaned metadata and gene expression matrix to file

> Last step, write the cleaned metadata into `metadata_GSE49243_cleaned.tsv` and cleaned gene expression matrix into `GSE49243_cleaned.tsv` the exercise-results directory. 

Reviewer: This is beyond the 80 character limit.

> Last step, write the cleaned metadata into `metadata_GSE49243_cleaned.tsv` and cleaned gene expression matrix into `GSE49243_cleaned.tsv` the exercise-results directory. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Last step, write the cleaned metadata into `metadata_GSE49243_cleaned.tsv` and cleaned gene expression 
matrix into `GSE49243_cleaned.tsv` the results directory (which we saved as `results_dir`).
```

```{r}
# Write cleaned metadata to file

> 

Reviewer: Extra line? Maybe?

# Write cleaned gene expression matrix to file

```

> You should notice two files named `metadata_GSE49243_cleaned.tsv`and `GSE49243_cleaned.tsv has been created in `exercise-results` directory. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To check if you've completed these steps successfully, you should check for two files called `metadata_GSE49243_cleaned.tsv`and `GSE49243_cleaned.tsv` in your `exercise-results` directory. 
Would also be good to open the files and check to see if they contain the information you would expect. 
```

---
title: 'Exercise: Clean Metadata and Prepare Gene Expression Matrix for Downstream
  Analysis'
output:
  html_notebook:
    toc: yes
    toc_float: yes
---
The goal of these exercises is to help you get familiar with using tidyverse 
functions to manipulate data. 

In this example, we will use a [medulloblastoma dataset](https://www.refine.bio/experiments/GSE49243/gene-expression-data-from-medulloblastoma-tumor-samples) 
that has been processed on [refine.bio](http://docs.refine.bio/en/latest/main_text.html#processing-information). 
In short, this study collected medulloblastoma microarray profiles from patients
of a variety of ages and includes information about their demographics and 
histology of the medulloblastoma samples [(Kool et al. _Cancer Cell_ . 2014.)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24651015).

### Setup 

> Before we start the exercises, we need to create the necessary directories and 

Reviewer 2: I find it easier to read the Rmd file in RStudio if there is a space between headers and the text beneath. For instance, this would become
```
### Setup

Before we start the exercises...
```
I would carry this change throughout.

load the necessary libraries.

#### Creating necessary directories
We need to create a directory to store the results of the exercises. 
We have done this for you. 
Run the code chunk below and take a look at your files pane. 
You should see the directory `exercise-results` created. 

```{r}
results_dir <- "exercise-results"
# creating results directory if it doesn't exist
if (!dir.exists(results_dir)) {
  dir.create(results_dir)
}
```

#### Loading libraries
For these exercises, we will need the `tidyverse` libraries. 
Go ahead and load the library in the code chunk below.
Don't forget to run the code chunk once you write the command! 

```{r}
# load tidyverse library

```

#### Importing files

> Let's import all the files we will need for this exercise. 

Reviewer 2: It might be helpful to specifically call these files out as TSV files here.

by using pipes `%>%` and storing the result in `metadata_clean`. 

```{r}
# manipulations w/o pipes
metadata_nopipe <- metadata
metadata_nopipe <- filter(metadata_nopipe, refinebio_age < 18)
metadata_nopipe <- select(metadata_nopipe, refinebio_accession_code, 
                          refinebio_age, refinebio_sex, histology)
metadata_nopipe <- arrange(metadata_nopipe, refinebio_age)
```

It's your turn! 

```{r}
# now you try it, with pipes %>%
metadata_clean <- 
  
```

Run the code chunk below to check if you got the same results. 

```{r}
all.equal(metadata_nopipe, metadata_clean)
```

#### Rename columns
The column names `refinebio_accession_code`, `refinebio_age`, `refinebio_sex` 
are too unwieldy. 
Let's rename them to something more manageable like `sample_id`, `age`, and 
`sex` respectively. 

To do this, tidyverse has a function `dplyr::rename`. 
Use the help window to understand how you can use this function. 
Store the renamed metadata back into the variable `metadata_clean`. 
(Feel free to google for solutions as well!)

```{r}
# use the help window to learn how you can use the rename function
metadata_clean <- 

```

> Use `head` function check if the column names changed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the `head` function check if the column names changed.
```

each tissue by sex. 

If you get stuck at any point, feel free to refer to the help window or google 
for solutions.

```{r}
# calculate mean age by sex

```

```{r}
# calculate mean age by histology

```

```{r}
# calculate how many of each tissue type exists for each sex

```

### Select the samples in the gene expression matrix
Now, select the samples in the gene expression matrix so that it has the same 
samples as `metadata_clean`. 
(Remember we read the gene expression matrix into `gene_expression`)

```{r}
# select the gene expression matrix by samples in the cleaned metadata
cleaned_gene_expression <- 
```

### Write to files

#### Write to cleaned metadata and gene expression matrix to files
Last step, write the cleaned metadata into `metadata_GSE49243_cleaned.tsv` and 
cleaned gene expression 
matrix into `GSE49243_cleaned.tsv` the results directory (which we saved as 
`results_dir`).

```{r}
# write cleaned metadata to file

# write cleaned gene expression matrix to file

```

To check if you've completed these steps successfully, you should check for two 
files called `metadata_GSE49243_cleaned.tsv` and `GSE49243_cleaned.tsv` in your 
`exercise-results` directory. 

> Would also be good to open the files and check to see if they contain the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Open the files and check to see if they contain the 
```

---
title: 'Exercise: Clean Metadata and Prepare Gene Expression Matrix for Downstream
  Analysis'
output:
  html_document:

>     df_print: paged

Reviewer: What's this for?

Reviewer: `data.frames` are paged by default, so this argument isn't necessary. Probably doesn't hurt anything, but having this here does make it different than the rest of the RMarkdowns.

`sex` respectively. 

To do this, tidyverse has a function `dplyr::rename`. 
Use the help window to understand how you can use this function. 
Store the renamed metadata back into the variable `metadata_clean`. 
(Feel free to google for solutions as well!)

```{r}
# use the help window to learn how you can use the rename function
metadata_clean <- 

```

Use `head` function check if the column names changed.

```{r}

```

### Summarize metadata
Now, let's calculate the mean age by sex, mean age by histology, and counts of 
each tissue by sex. 

If you get stuck at any point, feel free to refer to the help window or google 
for solutions.

```{r}
# calculate mean age by sex

```

```{r}
# calculate mean age by histology

```

```{r}
# calculate how many of each tissue type exists for each sex

```

### Select the samples in the gene expression matrix
Now, select the samples in the gene expression matrix so that it has the same 
samples as `metadata_clean`. 
(Remember we read the gene expression matrix into `gene_expression`)

```{r}
# select the gene expression matrix by samples in the cleaned metadata
cleaned_gene_expression <- 
```

### Write to files

> #### Write to cleaned metadata and gene expression matrix to file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Write to cleaned metadata and gene expression matrix to files
```

Last step, write the cleaned metadata into `metadata_GSE49243_cleaned.tsv` and 
cleaned gene expression 

> matrix into `GSE49243_cleaned.tsv` the results directory (which we saved as 

Reviewer: A lot of this sentence can be up on the next line after `cleaned gene expression`

`results_dir`).

```{r}
# write cleaned metadata to file

# write cleaned gene expression matrix to file

```

To check if you've completed these steps successfully, you should check for two 

> files called `metadata_GSE49243_cleaned.tsv`and `GSE49243_cleaned.tsv` in your 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
files called `metadata_GSE49243_cleaned.tsv` and `GSE49243_cleaned.tsv` in your 
```

```

It's your turn! 

```{r}
# now you try it, with pipes %>%
metadata_clean <- 
  
```

Run the code chunk below to check if you got the same results. 

```{r}
all.equal(metadata_nopipe, metadata_clean)
```

#### Rename columns

The column names `refinebio_accession_code`, `refinebio_age`, `refinebio_sex` 
are too unwieldy. 
Let's rename them to something more manageable like `sample_id`, `age`, and 
`sex` respectively. 

To do this, tidyverse has a function `dplyr::rename`. 
Use the help window to understand how you can use this function. 
Store the renamed metadata back into the variable `metadata_clean`. 
(Feel free to google for solutions as well!)

```{r}
# use the help window to learn how you can use the rename function
metadata_clean <- 

```

Use the `head` function check if the column names changed.

```{r}

```

### Summarize metadata

Now, let's calculate the mean age by sex, mean age by histology, and counts of 
each tissue by sex. 

If you get stuck at any point, feel free to refer to the help window or google 
for solutions.

```{r}
# calculate mean age by sex

```

```{r}
# calculate mean age by histology

```

```{r}

> # calculate how many of each tissue type exists for each sex

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# calculate how many of each histology type exists for each sex
```
